Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in our last video
we introduced a simpler notion of a limit we
were able to do that because we're focusing on
rational poly numbers as the primary objects the
initial objects in calculus the definition was the
following suppose that P is a rational poly number
and that means pretty well the same thing is a
rational function in the usual terminology and
that a is a rational number then the limit as n
approaches infinity of P of N equals a this means
the following so we're defining what this means
it means that we can find two natural numbers m
and K so that if n is bigger than or equal to
M then this inequality holds the inequality is
that the difference between P of N and a is
bounded on either side by K on N and minus
K on n so this should be true for all natural
numbers n which happen to be bigger than M so
these numbers m and K we refer to them as the
start and the scale because M is the start so
that's sort of the place where the the inequality
starts for all n starting from there and K is the
scale because it sort of determines what the
scale of the bound on the difference should
be and these are certificates for the limit
in the sense that there are documents that
we can present that verify that substantiate the
claim that the limit of P of n is equal a is our
definition of the limit of a rational poly number
being equal to a certain rational number and it's
a lot simpler both in theory and in practice to
the more welter the standard definition that you
find in all calculus texts which in fact students
struggle with and which is often not really taken
seriously in most courses unless it's a sort of
high level course but I think this definition is
accessible to even ordinary students the logical
structure is not that difficult and we'll see
that in practice it's not too hard to work with
this and we can get a good visual understanding
of what a limit means by approaching it from this
no-nonsense point of view so first let's make the
observation that the basic inequality on the
previous slide that had a star beside it can
be re-written in this form here so all that
we've done is we've moved the minus a which
was inside here so we could use to have P of n
minus a and we've added a to all sides so that
now there's an a on this side of this may on this
side this is another way for us to to see that P
of n is sandwiched between a plus something and a
minus something it's another way of thinking about
what the limit means okay so here's a picture that
tries to illustrate what's going on so we have n
in this direction here and we have a sequence and
P of N and we're just giving you rather arbitrary
values of the sequence here they are right here
these black and blue dots and here is the value a
which in this case happens to be 6 there's the
value 6 and in this case here we're trying to
illustrate the idea that the limit as n approaches
infinity of P of n cap to be six so if we want to
illustrate that means we have to find an M and a
K so that this inequality is satisfied that six
minus four over N is less than or equal to P of n
which is less than or equal to six plus four over
N so in other words P of n is sandwiched between
six plus four over N and six minus four over N
what that means geometrically well there is the
value 6 and here this hyperbola branch represents
six plus four n so when n is one six plus four
over n is 10 so there is there and when n is two
we have 6 plus 4 over 2 which is 8 and then here
is 6 plus 4 over 3 6 plus 4 over 4 6 plus 4 over
5 and so on and as n gets bigger 6 plus four n
converges approaches 6 because the four over N
term goes to 0 as n gets big on the other side we
have 6 minus 4 over n so that when n is 1 we have
6 minus 4 which is 2 down here and then 6 minus 2
which is here 6 minus 4 over 3 6 minus 4 over 4 6
minus 4 over 5 and so on those are the values
of 6 minus 4 over N the left hand side and so
this inequality is just telling us that we want
P of n to be within these bounds to be between
6 minus four over N on the bottom and 6 plus 4
ah 10 on the top so this sequence is not always
inside this region but it is inside the region
after a certain point so if we start with 8 after
8 it certainly looks like all the terms of the
sequence are sandwiched between these two arms
these 2 hyperbolic arms which approach 6 and so 8
is our starting point 8 is the number M so the the
claim is that if n is bigger than or equal to 8 in
other words if we just look from here on then yes
indeed the sequences values are satisfying this
inequality so M equals 8 is the start K equals 4
is the scale and if we change the scale what would
happen is that the hyperbola would go up or down
it'd be wider or narrower so if we increase K
then the hyperbola becomes wider apart still
may be at arms like this or arms like this and if
we decrease K then it becomes closer to the green
line so this is quite different from the usual
calculus notion because once and for all we're
choosing an envelope there's only the one envelope
given by 6 minus 4n six plus 4n it doesn't change
there's no epsilon dependence here we're looking
for a fixed envelope that contains the sequence
and the envelope is completely characterized by
these two numbers K and M which in this case are
4 and 8 so it's a relatively simple and I think
easy to understand geometrical situation the idea
of the limit of a rational polly number sequence
so in my last video i gave you some exercises with
limits and i want to have a look at those those
exercises today so let's go over them the first
one was to show that the limit as n approaches
infinity of 1 over n plus 1 is 0 ok intuitively
yes this makes sense this is quite reasonable we
want to see that the actual definition corresponds
with our intuition so according to the definition
what we need to do is we want to find em maintain
natural numbers that have the following property
that if n is bigger than or equal to M then the
difference between these two things which is 1
over n plus 1 it's sandwiched between K over N
and minus K over N so that's our job to find an
M and a K that's all we have to do find those
two natural numbers and they're not necessarily
unique so we need to find some natural number m
and some natural number K so that when n is bigger
than or equal to M then this inequality is true so
we look at this inequality and ask well when is
this true what value of K do we have to put in
here so that this is true for some values of N
past a certain point well 1 over N and 1 over n
plus 1 they already have a relation but 1 over
n plus 1 will always be less than or equal to
1 over n because as the denominator gets bigger
the fraction or the rational number gets smaller
so if we have a k equal to 1 here then this
is going to be automatically true this right
hand inequality and the left hand is inequality
is true automatically because that's always a
positive quantity remember n is a natural number
throughout and this is always negative so that's
sort of automatic so it's very simple we just
choose m equals 1 and k equals 1 since and then
we can write it if n is bigger than or equal to 1
then minus 1 or n is less than or equal to 1 over
n plus 1 is less than or equal to 1 over m right
this is a true statement if N is a natural number
bigger than or equal to 1 so we found our M we
found our K we found the start we found the scale
you know the certificates required we can assert
that according to the definition the limit as n
approaches infinity of 1 over n plus 1 equals 0
so the second example was the limit of 1 over N
squared which is all zero so what do we want to do
well here's the inequality that we want to prove
the difference is one over N squared it's got to
be between K over N and minus K over N and that's
got to be true when n is bigger than or equal to
a myrrh so we have to find m and K so that's true
so then we look at this and say well when is this
kind of inequality true this is always positive
that's always negative so this is automatically
true we don't have to worry about that how about
this inequality well 1 over N compared to 1 over
N squared how do you compare them well N squared
is bigger than n just like n plus 1 is bigger than
n so 1 over N squared is less than or equal to 1
over n we can get away with putting K equals 1 so
if M is equal to 1 and K is equal to 1 then for
any natural number n this inequality is going
to be true therefore the limit as n approaches
infinity of 1 over N squared is 0 so far all the
examples are very simple with the start and scale
both being equal to 1 all right let's have a look
at the third exercise I gave you which is a little
bit more challenging the limit of 1 plus n over
2 plus n as n goes to infinity is equal to 1 all
right so here the rational poly number that we're
talking about is 1 plus alpha over 2 plus alpha so
we want to find a number m a natural number called
the start and another natural number K call the
scale so that if n is bigger than or equal to M
then the difference between the sequence and the
limit is sandwiched between K over N and minus K
over N so we have to have a look at what's inside
here 1 plus n over 2 plus n minus 1 we can get
that over a common denominator and it becomes
minus 1 over 2 plus and so the inequality that
we want to have satisfy is now minus K over N
is less than or equal to minus 1 over 2 plus n
is less than or equal to K over N and there are
really two inequalities here we have to have this
satisfied and we also have to have this satisfied
and let's just remind ourselves that all of the
quantities inside here are natural numbers like
1 2 3 4 or 5 so we want this to be true for all
n bigger than or equal to some M and we have to
choose K appropriately to make that happen so here
are the two inequalities the left hand 1 the right
hand 1 the right hand one holds automatically
because now this quantity is always negative
because there's a minus sign here and n is always
a natural number so there's always less than 0 and
the right hand side is always positive so that's
gonna hold automatically we only have to think
about this left hand inequality okay so let's
have a look at that so it's minus K on n is less
than or equal to minus 1 over 2 plus n we want to
rearrange this so that it's a little bit easier to
work with well we can take this thing to the left
hand side and this thing to the right hand side
so that the minus signs disappear so if we bring
minus this to the other side it becomes plus 1
over 2 plus N and we bring this to the other side
then we get plus K over N so this is equivalent
to the inequality 1 over 2 plus n is less than
or equal to K over N well these two numbers are
positive so this inequality is equivalent to
this one here where we've multiplied through
by the common denominator which is positive
so n is less than or equal to K times 2 plus
kay is a natural number and is a natural number
this was automatically true for any natural
number because 2 plus n he is bigger than N and
K is at least 1 so it's automatically true that
means we can choose M equals 1 and K equals 1
and then for any n bigger than or equal to 1
then this inequality this one here being replaced
by this one here will automatically be true so we
conclude that the limit as n approaches infinity
of 1 plus n over 2 plus n is equal to 1 that was
important for us to put out 1 here if we had put
anything else here then this inequality would not
have worked you can perhaps think about that so
all the examples so far in some sense have been
very straightforward we haven't had to do a lot of
subtle thinking at all all the scales and starts
have been won so far because we've had relatively
simple examples so far clearly we're going to have
to have some skill in dealing with inequalities
when we work with this limit concept because
we would have to manipulate inequalities in fact
inequalities are crucially important for analysis
generally and it's important therefore for us
to review the basic foundations of inequalities
this is a subject that we haven't talked too much
about in this series so maybe is a chance now for
me to fill in some gaps let's talk a little
bit about inequalities for the rest of this
video let's start with the simplest case when we
go right back to the natural numbers and back to
the first video in this series which I hope you've
all watched math foundations 1 and the question
that arises is how do we compare two numbers this
is a very primitive situation where a number was
represented just by a bunch of strokes on a page
so suppose one person writes a bunch of strokes
there if someone else comes along and writes some
other ones both of them are numbers which one of
them is bigger well before we were able to count
before we've given names to numbers we can still
figure out which one is a bigger number by doing
the following by pairing them up matching this
one with this one maybe can think of them as
twigs this twig matched up with this one this
one with this one these two these two these two
these two these these these and now we see that
this first number has two left over so it's the
bigger number that's how we can decide that M is
bigger than n even if we cannot count of course
with our more advanced notation we would say that
this number n plus two equals M and that allows
us to conclude that n is in fact less than M so
here's a definition of the inequality what does it
mean for m to be less than n for natural numbers
eminent well it means that n is equal to M plus
K for some natural number K if we can get from M
to n by adding something then M has to be less
than n or n is greater than M same thing okay
so having made that definition we can now do a
few exercises and I'm going to leave most of the
details here to you so I'll show that if L m and
n are natural numbers and L is less than M and M
is less than n then L is less than n similarly
show that if we have three natural numbers K in
them then if M is less than N and we multiply
both of them by K then K times M is less than
K times n in fact you could also show that K plus
M is less than k plus n that's probably something
else we should include as something to do very
basic manipulations with inequalities for just
natural numbers to start with so now let's fast
forward two integers which were introduced in
math foundations 12 and hope you've all watched
that so let me remind you that an integer a was
defined in terms of a pair of natural numbers
we said that if we had an expression m less n
so this little forward slash is read as less
m less n we agree that m less n is equal to p
less q and these are all natural numbers
precisely when m plus Q equals n plus P
so the meaning of it is a lot like subtraction
if you just move that a little bit further it's
really like m minus n equals P minus Q but this
is before we've actually defined subtraction okay
that's how we define the notion of an integer in
quality between two representations of an integer
all right so now we can define inequalities for
integers here are two integers m less N and P less
Q what does it mean for this one to be less than
this one for a to be less than B well it means
that M plus Q is less than n plus P they're equal
when these two quantities are equal but if this
one is bigger than this one then we say that
B is bigger than a so this expression reduces
to knowing the inequality for natural number so
the inequality for integers is dependent on the
inequality for natural numbers which is only fair
and I remind you that we introduced the special
integer zero as one less one or two less two or
three less three etc and we can also define the
negative of an integer and the negative of MLS
n is for the reversed and less M okay so now we
can introduce the important ideas of positive
and negative integers so we're working here in
the integers a is an integer then it's deemed
to be positive written this way zero less than
or equal to a or a greater than or equal to zero
precisely when a is bigger than zero or a equals
zero so in here we've defined what it means for
one integer to be strictly less than the other
we're saying that a is positive if it's strictly
bigger than zero or if it's equal to zero this
is not entirely standard notation half the world
treats positivity with an equal sign and the rest
the other half treats it without an equal sign
so it's a bit of a debate I prefer to think of
positivity as including zero right so let's
adopt that policy zero is a positive number
according to this definition and negative numbers
are symmetrical so a is negative precisely when
a is less than or equal to zero and that means
that a is either less than zero or it's equal
to zero so positive and negative are exactly
symmetrically defined of course that means
that zero is both positive and negative that's
all right then a number is strictly positive a
when well when it's greater than zero and it's
strictly negative when it's less than zero so
positive negative strictly positive and strictly
negative I'd like to remark that what we are
calling positive is often these days called non
negative this is a word that's quite often used
and I think it's unfortunate because it contains
this double negative to talk about something which
is more simply expressed with a single positive so
I'm going to try to avoid the use of non negative
and I urge you to do the same it's not necessary
positive and strictly positive suffice to describe
quite clearly the two possible situations there
okay then another exercise that if a B and C are
integers then if a is less than B then minus B
is less than minus a if a is less than B and B
is less than C then a is less than C if a is less
than B and C is strictly positive then a times C
is less than B times C on the other hand if a
is less than B and C is strictly negative then
B times C is less than a times C so the order
of the inequality reverses when you multiply
both sides by a strictly negative number and we
also agree that will be flexible about choice of
inequality so a is less than B that means exactly
the same as this thing here which we could read as
B is greater than a alright so there are exactly
the same meaning okay so now let's move up to the
rational numbers and introduced inequalities
in that context and of course it's dependent
on the prior notions for natural numbers and
integers that we've already introduced so P
is a rational number means its a over B or a and
B are integers and B is not equal to zero and I
remind you that we have this notion of equality
that a over B equals C over D precisely when ad
minus BC equals zero okay so let's start by
introducing a notion of strictly positive so
the rational number P or a over B is strictly
positive in other words it's greater than zero
what does that mean well it means that a and B
are both strictly positive integers or a and B
are both strictly negative integers we have to
deal with the fact that a and B are not unique
we can multiply both a and B by any nonzero number
and get an equal rational number in particular we
could multiply both of them by -1 and the rational
number hasn't changed if we multiply both of them
by -1 then this total condition doesn't change we
might go from this condition to that conditioner
from that one to that but the whole condition
doesn't change so this unambiguously defines
what a positive strictly positive rational number
is now we can define when one rational number is
less than another rational number by agreeing
that that happens precisely when the difference
c over d minus a over b is positive so we can
define inequality in terms of our notion of
positivity okay and then there's various things
that one can show along the lines of the previous
kind of exercises so I'll leave it to you that
if you have say for rational numbers P Q R and
s then if P is less than Q if we add R to both
sides then P plus R is less than Q plus R now
if we subtract R from both sides P minus R is
still less than Q minus R on the other hand if
we multiply by something that's true b-positive
then well the order doesn't change so P times R
is still less than Q times R or if we divide by
something that's strictly positive then P over R
is still less than Q over R however if we try
the same thing with something that's strictly
negative we have to swap the order just as we saw
for integers so if P is less than Q to start with
and we multiply by something strictly negative
then we have to interchange the order so that
Q R is less than P R now that also happens if
we divide by R so Q over R will be less than P
over R and then P less than Q and R less than s
we can add those two inequalities to get P plus
R less than Q plus s now very likely there are a
few more that I haven't haven't thought up here
so I don't want to minimize the importance of this
is actually quite important that one understands
inequality is very well and that's somewhere this
is all laid out and given nice consistent proofs
for so we're not going to do that because we're
a little bit impatient to get on to two limits
and talking about the problems with real numbers
but I don't want to slight this the importance
of this topic inequalities are very important in
mathematics and having some place where this is
all laid out very clearly and pleasantly would be
a great thing later on in this in this course I'm
going to talk about a proposed project where I'm
going to try to encourage people to start working
together to to create a framework sort of a wiki
framework for for mathematical foundations and so
I'm hoping that some of you will will help at
that point and actually write down details of
things like this and in a public domain lots
of links where everyone can check things and
where we can actually become much more confident
about the foundations of mathematics I think this
is seriously missing up till now and it's it's an
important goal that world will talk about later on
in this course so that's a Lisa a bit of a review
or introduction perhaps to inequalities and these
are important tools when we're working with limits
which is what we're interested in doing right now
right so here are some exercises for you a little
bit more sophisticated now little bit more complex
limits so show that the limit as n approaches
infinity of 2 + 3 n / 1 + 2 n equals 3 halves the
limit of 1 + N squared over 1 + 2 n cubed equals
0 the limit of 1 + n + n squared over 1 minus 2
n + 5 n squared equals 1 over 5 and in this case
here I'm asking you to find the limits I'm not
telling you what the limit is and asking you to
prove it I'm asking you to first of all find the
limits so find the limit as n approaches infinity
of -1 + 3 n over 2 minus 4 N and the limit as n
approaches infinity of 5 minus 2n squared over N
+ N squared now once you found the limit in some
way or another prove show that that actually is
the limit by going back to the definition so for
example 2 to come up with this three-halves it's
not too hard you just imagine what happens if n
is very very big number like if N is a thousand
if N is a thousand this is three thousand and
two divided by two thousand and one that's pretty
close to three over two and we can imagine in our
minds very easily that if n is very big this 2 and
this one are almost insignificant it's almost like
3 + / 2n which is three halves but that's not an
argument to prove that the limit is that let's
just suggest that the limit is three halves the
official definition requires certificate requires
that you give me an M and a K and that you verify
the crucial inequality that bounds the difference
between the sequence and the limit all right
so good exercises a little bit more algebraic
skill and working with inequalities is going to
be required here next time well we want to go
further we want to start talking a little bit more
about these higher degree rational paly numbers
and limits for them and we also want to address
the issue of what happens when you don't have
an N squared over an N cubed but an n cubed over
at N squared say in which case the limit in some
sense is going to infinity because we want to talk
about what does it mean for such a non sequence to
go to infinity I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman wildberger thanks for listening